jupyter-book/spatial/introduction.md, before:

# Spatially resolved transcriptomics - introduction

In single-cell biology, a classical visualization of bulk RNA sequencing is a smoothie which resembles a diverse mixture of different cells all stired together. In single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) cells are dissociated form the tissue and are analyzed based on their genes expression profile. So, scRNA-seq can be visualized by digging into a fruit salat. 

If we stick to the fruit motto, spatially resolved transcriptomic methods can be seen as a fruit tart. The exact position of every strawberry, banana and others is known and we can inspect the relationship between each piece. Spatial single-cell transcriptomics is becoming increasingly important and was announced Method of the Year in 2021 by Nature{cite}`marx_method_2021`. It measures transcriptomic information while spatial information is preserved. Spatial transciptomic data can be generated in multiple ways by measuring the RNA molecules by in situ sequencing, in situ hybridization or spatial barcoding. Each method aims to recover the original spatial coordinates. 

Adding the spatial information adds various new analysis and visualization opportunities and challenges which opens the field for new novel methods. {cite}`10.3389/fgene.2021.785290` provided a complete review of current analysis steps and methods for spatial transcriptomics data. We will summarize their findings in this chapter and show an examplary analysis workflow for for targetted and spot-based spatial transcriptomics data.

Commit message:

update all cells to new dataset

jupyter-book/spatial/introduction.md, after:

# Single-cell data resolved in space

## Introduction

Bulk and single-cell genomic technologies enabled us to characterize and understand cellular identities and their dependencies on genome scale. Up to this point, all single-cell technologies described in this work characterized dissociated cells that were removed from the sample of interest. However, by removing the spatial context of the cells and their molecules, one also loses the spatial context which is an essential component for many biological questions. Spatially resolved genomics resolve this issue by measuring both genome-scale omics and preserving the spatial information. 


## Overview of spatial profiling measurements

Spatially resolved genomics can be measured with various technologies that quantify the transcriptome, proteome or chromatin accessibility. However, these technologies vary in terms of scale, resolution, sensitivity, multiplexing and applicability. As the landscape of spatially resolved genomics is developing fast and is expected to change massively in the next few years, we are introducing the analysist only to three overall groups of spatial omics technologies based on their capturing resolution. Additional information can be obtained through the linked reviews and papers following this introduction. 

ADD FIGURE ON RESOLUTIONS

Broadly spoken, one can differentiate spatially resolved genomics into technologies that measure at multi-cell, single-cell and sub-cellular resolution. We will shortly motivate each of those scales and highlight their advantages and challenges and introduce the reader to a few technologies that fall into the respective category. 

### Multi-cell resolution
Spatial omics data obtained at multi-cell resolution typically captures omics measurements among several cells. So, each datapoint contains information from a varying number of cells and also potentially different cell types. Multi-cell resolution data can be decomposed with deconvolution methods to obtain proportions of different cells or cell types per spot.

Multi-cell resolution data typically capture transcriptome-wide gene expression profiles at varying resolution. The obtained resolution for spot-based technologies varies between 55um (Visium) to 10 um (slide-seq). A widely known, commercially available and successful technology is Visium provided by 10x Genomics. We will showcase how to analyze and deconvolute Visium data in the tutorials.

### Single-cell resolution
Spatial omics data obtained at single-cell resolution either directly capture single cells at their exact position or capture spots on the scale of single-cell. Examples for spot-based methods are HDST, slide-seqV2 or stero-seq. These methods capture the whole transcriptome but still have a low capture efficiency. 

Targeted methods provide an alternative for measuring cells at their exact position. Common examples are MERFISH, seqFISH+, IMC or multiplexed IHC (e.g. cyCIF and CODEX). These technologies are usually expensive and only measure a limited features space. 

### Sub-cellular resolution
Spatial omics data at sub-cellular resolution captures the position of individual RNA molecules. Those positions can either be captured through single-molecule imaging or via spatial barcoding with spot-sizes smaller than single-cells. By performing cell segmentation on sub-cellular data on can obtain single-cell resolution data where expression is aggregated to cell-wise measurements which than can be processed in spatially-aware analysis pipelines. We will show how to perform this analysis for a MERFISH dataset.
